I mean Esther said he wanted to move on
and draw a line under that do you think
the government have managed to do that
in the last few days I mean they have in
the sense that it's not on the front
pages of the newspapers anymore it
doesn't mean that people will instantly
forget what happened and I think that'll
be the worry amongst some in Downing
Street but also conservative MPs who
feel that actually it really has had
quite an impact you know not on
popularity necessarily but maybe on
trust in government you know at a really
crucial moment when people are going to
be contacted and told right you have to
go into isolation now because you have
been in contact with someone who has
tested positive it really does depend
this whole thing on people following the
rules and the guidance and so I think
that's the real fear is that has it had
a lasting impact on the way that people
behave and again it's very difficult to
know whether that's the case or not but
you know there are a lot of conservative
MPs who do feel that the Prime Minister
has been personally harmed by this
because he didn't sack Dominic Cummings
and he obviously did want to keep him
onside at this crucial time and as
you've been saying all through this
crisis really it's been a balance for
the government and for Boris Johnson you
know whether to save lives or save the
economy and the difficulties of doing
that the delicate balance and it is that
really once again at this moment what's
been described as a dangerous moment
once again yeah and I think of course at
the beginning all of the focus was on
hospitals in particular on trying to
save lives and the health element of
this of course was right at the top it
was the priority but of course you know
ministers and particularly those in the
Treasury have been well aware of the
repercussions and they've brought in
those schemes to try and help people to
make sure they've still got money coming
in and to make sure that businesses can
survive
[Music]
here is the Downing Street briefing Matt
Hancock the health secretary good
afternoon and welcome to Downing Street
for today's coronavirus briefing we're
going to do things slightly differently
today and I'm going to go through the
charts I'm joined by Professor John
Newton from the test and trace program
and will then answer questions from the
public and from journalists and if
there's one message that we have today
it's that it is incredibly important for
anybody who has symptoms of coronavirus
a cough or a fever or a change in your
sense of taste or smell that you get a
test because it's by people coming
forward to get the test which you can
get on NHS doc you have UK forward slash
coronavirus or by dialing 1 1 9 it's by
getting those tests that were able to
identify those who've got the virus
ensuring that you get the best possible
treatment and ensuring that we can then
trace the virus and that we can through
that we can control the virus so that is
the most important message and what
everybody can do to help to control this
virus if we turn now to the slides the
first slide shows testing capacity and
new cases and yesterday there were 128
thousand four hundred and thirty seven
tests in the UK meaning that there's
been a total of four point four eight
million tests that have been carried out
since the start of this crisis now of
course testing capacity stands at a
higher level testing capacity stands at
two hundred and six thousand four
hundred and forty four and this shows
that there is extra capacity for more
tests and tests are available right now
on the website if you go to NHS UK
forward slash coronavirus or if you
can't
access the web if you dial 1 1 9 and I
wanted to highlight that because it's so
important that people come forward for a
test and anyone who needs a test can get
a test the next if we say at the
previous slide the next chart that shows
that there are 1570 cases confirmed as
of yesterday and this is the lowest
number since the 25th of March in total
two hundred and seventy six thousand
people cases have been confirmed in
total but this number of 1570 is it
shows that we've seen continued downward
progress in the number of new confirmed
cases
next slide please thank you very much
we're getting this virus under control
and this is why we can make the cautious
small positive steps that we've been
able to make today and if we look at the
number of Admissions we've covered
nineteen to hospital at four hundred and
seventy nine that's down from a peak of
3121 on the second of April and the
number of the proportion of people on
mechanical ventilators the number that
corresponds to that nine percent figure
is that there are six hundred and six
people on mechanical ventilators again
that is the lowest since late March next
slide please
the picture is repeated across the
country where we've seen in almost every
case the number of people in hospital
we've covered nineteen is the lowest
since late March and as of yesterday
there were seven thousand five hundred
and forty-one people in hospital with
kovat 19 if we go to our final slide
sadly thirty-nine thousand and forty
five people have died with corona virus
confirmed with a positive test that's a
hundred and eleven yesterday
again that figure is the lowest figure
since lockdown began on the 23rd of
March so we can see from these charts
the pattern right across the board which
is that on the substance we're making
significant progress but there is still
more to be done
and I just want to say a few notes of
thanks thanks to our volunteers
responders who in their hundreds of
thousands have come forward and stepped
up to the plate thanks to the charities
and the charity groups who are working
so hard in very difficult times
thanks to colleagues in the NHS and in
social care and also to the businesses
the pharmaceutical companies and the
diagnostics companies without whom we
simply couldn't have mounted this
response so the pharmacists and the
dentists and I'm very pleased that
dentistry is going to restart from next
week and especially for their hard work
and their understanding all of the
families who stand behind those who were
on the frontline and at the start of
Pride season I want to take a moment
when we can't get together as we
normally would to thank all colleagues
in the LGBT community who do so much in
the NHS and across social care
I think these data show that the action
plan is working the data show that we
are winning the battle against
coronavirus today we're therefore able
to make some cautious changes to the
lockdown rules carefully and safely of
course these are balanced judgments and
we take these decisions very carefully
we must all remember that in the war
against this virus we are all on the
same side we've come so far together we
can take these steps together but do not
step too far
the disease is not done yet we mustn't
throw away the progress that has been
made so please take your responsibility
seriously if you have symptoms you must
get a test and if the NHS asks you to
isolate you must do so and to everybody
please stay alert
control the virus and save lives will
now go straight to questions the first
question from the first questions are
from the public and the first question
is from Nick from London on video Nick
with the coronavirus sending us into a
deep recession that's likely to hurt the
prospects of many school leavers and
young people why is the government
planning to do to address this
well thanks Nick that's a very very
important question as well as the health
response we take very seriously the
economic response especially towards
those who are starting out in their
careers as you've mentioned school
leavers and young people but actually
right across the board the amount of
economic support that we've put into the
economy is unprecedented with the
furlough scheme one of the most generous
in the world and the direct support for
businesses because our judgement is that
it's best to keep businesses up and
running as much as is possible
we can't save everyone but keep them up
and running as much as possible
therefore to keep the jobs there for
people to go back to as we get through
this crisis but it's also true that the
economy is going to have to change we're
going to have to need a different type
of economy as we come out of this and
you'll be hearing more of that from the
Chancellor and the Prime Minister who've
been working so hard on getting this
right in the in the weeks and months to
come it's an incredibly important
question we want to support the economy
we've put that financial support in but
we've got to make sure the opportunities
are there as well unless you've got
anything to add on that one we'll go to
Jill from Warrington Jill asks the
shielding advice was updated on the 29th
of May it did not indicate it was safe
for those who are clinically extremely
vulnerable to go outside
what changed on the 30th of May to make
it safe well thank you Jill
we understand just how significant
asking people to shield was and still is
because the shielding is still very in
important and if you think about the
impact of having to stay at home for ten
weeks so far and to have to take the
extraordinary measures that we've put in
place to shield the clinically extremely
vulnerable that has been a very major
step and so when the clinical advice
said that it was safe to be able to
advise those who are shielded to be able
to go outside so long as they stay two
meters away from others then I think
that is a it's a small step it's a very
positive step for those who have been
shielding and I know that it's been very
well received by those who are shielding
and therefore can just start that to
make that positive change and just to be
able to go outside staying two meters
away from others so I'm glad we were
able to make that change we announced it
when it was when it was safe and ready
to do so and as I think you can see from
the charts that we put up one of the
reasons that we could make that change
is that the rate of incidence of disease
is now back down to the levels that it
was before we introduced the shielding
policy but of course the mainstay of the
shielding policy which is not to meet
other people it remains in place and is
very important it's just that people can
we think it's safe for people to go
outside in a very cautious and careful
way John well just as you say just to
emphasize them the main consideration is
the rate of infection in the community
at the time and as you've shown on the
slides all the indications are that that
is decreasing albeit slowly and in fact
there are other surveillance data so
public health England public's is it's a
weekly surveillance reports with a whole
range of other sources which are
available on the web and they also show
reductions in the rate of infection
although I think very important that
there are differences in different parts
of the country and those rates are kept
under review so all these decisions are
under review thank you thanks very much
and thanks very much for your question
Jill I think it's a very very important
subject and we now turn to hue pin from
the BBC
thank you very much Secretary of State
you've said that test and trace is vital
to stopping the spread of the virus
we've heard reports from some contact
traces that since they started work in
England last Thursday they've had very
little if anything to do what do you
think is actually happening with the
system thanks Hugh I'll say something
and then I'll ask John to add to that
the system is up and running it's
successful I'm very glad to report that
those who are asked to isolate by the
contact tracers
are expressing the the willingness to do
so and we track that very carefully now
one of the good pieces of good news is
that as the rate of incidence of new
cases comes down so of course there are
fewer index cases to track and we've had
as you know 25,000 people to work as
contact tracers and the level of
incidence of disease has come down and
so so actually we we have more capacity
than we need this is a this is a good
thing
yes thank you so active state so the yes
so exactly the test and trace program is
working well the data are flowing from
the testing portal into the contact
tracing software which is all have been
built relatively new so we're very
pleased see that all working well and
the contacts are being identified there
are different levels
there's the clinical Public Health level
which looks at more complicated cases
for example those arising in care homes
or in outbreaks of of some sort and then
there are cases which where people can
in fact into their own contact details
on the web-based portal so that doesn't
require the intervention of one of the
call handlers the the contact traces and
then there are those who need to be
contacted by the contact tracers and
there are plenty of cases and contexts
being
reported and being pursued in all three
of those areas so they are all working
and they're all working well but a
secretary state says we do have a lot of
capacity we're very grateful for all
those people who have come forward to
workers contact tracers and at the
moment many of them are not fully
occupied but we wait and see they're one
of the challenges of course of this is
to build a system that can respond to
whatever comes in the future and that is
a little difficult to predict we think
there will be flare-ups in different
parts of the country and we'll need to
be able to divert resources as required
but we wait and see but at the moment it
is working it's working well thanks very
much Oscar follow up yes of course do
you know how many contacts have actually
been made since Thursday because with
nearly 2,000 new cases each day you'd
have thought there would have been quite
a lot of work for them to do even with
the factors you mentioned well if you
think about it today the figures
announced today are that there were only
fifteen hundred and seventy new cases
which is lower than when we were
planning this system and so I think to
err on the side of having too many
contact tracers is the right side to
Iran and I'd rather have too many people
trained and ready to go we've got seven
and a half thousand clinicians in the
system which means that for every new
case we have on average six clinicians
able to support them and that also one
of the interesting things is that the
number of contacts that each index case
has is a bit lower than we were
expecting which implies that people are
following the social distancing rules
and are not coming into contact with
large numbers of people but of course
that also reduces the demand on on the
contact races
thanks very much Hugh the next question
from Tom Clark at ITV Tom thanks very
much Secretary of State could I just
follow up on a huge question actually
around 9,000 people have tested positive
for Kobe 19 since tests and trace was
launched last week how many have been
contacted by contact tracer and how many
of their contacts have been traced so I
don't have those
I'll ask John to answer but the the
answer is the vast majority and of
course many of them are able to put the
details in on a web-based portal rather
than directly on the phone well the
figures are going to be available soon
but as secretary state says the numbers
of tests being of test feeding through
and contacts being identified are high
and so we're we're very pleased with the
level of completeness so it's operating
really pretty much as we had hoped
of course of the numbers of new cases
not all of them need to go into the
contact tracing process so if it's a
case in a care home of somebody who's
already part of a known outbreak or if
the case indeed is already known to the
Public Health Service then they don't
need to be contact traced but of those
who are being contact traced a very high
proportion of people are working with us
to use the use the web-based system
themselves or to provide us with the
information so we're really very pleased
and the numbers are as we know we did a
trial in the Isle of Wight where we we
had some expectations from that and
secretary you said the numbers of
contacts are less than we had expected
that was that's really less than what
the modelers had in their models on
which they were using to to base the
effectiveness they're actually quite
similar to the numbers that we were
expecting from the Isle of Wight because
in in lockdown
of course people do not have that many
close contacts outside their household
so so the the system is working well and
we will be publishing some figures soon
I know I know everyone's very keen to
see them thanks very much tom as you
said surveillance for new outbreaks is
essential part of the town tray system
that the ability for local knockdowns as
I understand that that was the job of
the joint biosecurity Center there's
that center exists yet it's published no
reports as far as far as I can see and
has no website I just wanted to get
updates on the joint biosecurity center
yes that is we're getting it stood up
making sure that the that all of the
information flows are
it come to it so it's able to analyze
them and to make sure that it gets set
up correctly that's all all that works
being done being done out as we speak
well it's being formulated at the moment
it's being pulled together again
thanks very much Sam Coates from sky the
our if secretary of state
if the our rate goes up or the seven-day
rolling average for instance infection
start to Plateau or go up how likely is
it that you would reimpose some of the
blanket lockdown measures because some
people think that you just won't do that
under almost any circumstances um and
John Newton and it's quite clear that
you have a lot of data on the contact
tracing system that you're choosing not
to release today can I ask will we get
by the end of this week data on how many
what proportion of people with
infections have been contacted by your
army of contact tracers you know they've
been 3,500 people infected in the last
two days what proportion of them have
been contacted by your contact tracers
will you reveal how many contacts have
been traced to each infected individual
the average number you say you're
tracking that places they're not giving
us a figure again today and then levels
of compliance how many of those that you
phone up agree to isolate again you say
Matt Hancock says that there lots of
people have expressed a willingness to
do that will we get each of those
transparently released and why can't we
have them now Thanks thanks Sam on the
point about the blanket measures you
know the the truth is we are attempting
to move the system from these national
blanket measures to a more targeted
approach and this is why test and trace
is such an important part of that but
we've always said we've always said that
we're prepared to reintroduce measures
whether that's nationally or in response
to a localized outbreak if that is
necessary you know the steps that we're
able
to take today our cautious steps and
they they make they remove some of the
most difficult parts of the lockdown
with the goal of course of keeping our
below one and as one of the five tests
that we we wanted to meet I've also been
able to change the basis in law of these
of the lockdown because for the lockdown
until today the law has been that you
can't leave your home except for reasons
that are specifically set out and this
is very unusual in English law not the
approach that we've traditionally taken
for hundreds of years and instead we've
been able to flip the the basis of the
law back to specifically outlining
things that you cannot do as opposed to
saying you can't do anything unless it's
specifically provided for and I'm very
glad we've been able to change the basis
of the law to it and get away from what
it was essentially the most
authoritarian part of the system whilst
of course having rules and guidance that
have made some minor adjustments that
people are I know I can see today people
are are are able to do a bit more than
they were and we've seen people going
back to school and and some of the small
changes that we've made but I would just
emphasize that they are cautious they're
small and it's really important that we
we we stick with it and we keep our
resolve as a nation because it's how we
behave that affects they are not not the
rules themselves and on the second
question John yes so thank you so Ashley
state and so yes very good I mean the
they are new systems they're quite
complicated there are a number of
different systems that have been stood
up to deliver this so in order to
calculate the figures that you're asking
for you need to draw those data together
and integrate them and we know how
important these numbers are and how much
attention they get so we're very keen
that when we do report and they are
correct and they're accurate and it is
it's difficult to do that reliably so
I'm sorry if you could bear with us we
are still making sure that we get the
reliable data what we don't want to do
is to produce some data and then have to
go back and correct it so so we will be
producing that we are monitoring them
but we would like to do a little bit
more work on the systems before we
publish them
thanks very much Sam Peter Walker from
The Guardian thanks hi and to both of
you if I could ask the same question to
follow up citing what Sam said
Dominic Ruggles to race it yesterday the
idea that even certain parts of the
country the infection rate goes up the
idea of a lockdown will be an localized
one can I ask in practice how would that
actually work yeah would it just be for
example schools closing or would there
be a kind of stricter rules or would it
even be like a kind of North Italy or
Chinese cell one with any restrictions
on transport and can I ask you know how
would that work because people could
expect give them their very different
infection rates in different parts of
the country that that could actually
come to pass yes
taking local action to respond to a
local flare-up is a incredibly important
part of the toolkit that we have
available to respond if we need to and
this can take a range of options for
instance shutting to new admissions a
hospital ie if there were an outbreak in
that hospital that's one example and at
a local level the local director of
Public Health has a statutory duty and
responsibility and they would work with
the regional public health England and
NHS teams to make sure that we got the
response right the joint biosecurity
centers role is a national one to
provide the advice and the information
that would then be acted on locally and
the so the way to think of it is that is
the joint biosecurity Center has the
information it advises the CMOS of the
UK who in turn give advice to ministers
and to local public health bodies
through Phe so that architecture is is
now established and the JBC still
formally needs to come into
existence but we are putting in place
all of those data flows to augment the
already significant work that public
health England do in this space and a
toolkit that's available I the things
that we could do which includes for
instance changes to the hospitals that I
mentioned that toolkit is as broad as
the legal tool kit that we have
nationally and that's the set out in the
1984 Public Health Act for England and
Wales and in the relevant Scottish and
Northern Irish legislation augmented by
the coronavirus Act 2020 that we passed
a couple of months ago John but yes
Thank You secretary state so just to add
that this is outbreak control in
different areas is is likely to be used
this is what we see in other countries
as well that the corona virus flares up
in in certain areas so a circular
station is described there's a range of
public health measures when the only
thing I'd add is that it's really a
whole system response so each area has
as well as the director of Public Health
working for the local authority there is
a local resilience for where all the
other public services fire service
police and so on also contribute and
look at measures that might be taken
it's likely that the outbreaks will
occur in certain areas and therefore one
of the things which you're required is
what we call in emergence from mutual
aid so we're an area has for example has
to close a certain unit maybe it's a of
health care or social care other areas
can come in to help them so there are a
number of things that need to be done if
you have a local flare-up some public
health some more to do with a system
response but if this is really an
extension of normal processes but with a
very different flavor because of the
corona virus thanks very much could we
have Jamie cough ash from pulse magazine
hi Hector state you said earlier that
the change in shielding advice was
well-received have a GPS have told us
that today in surgery they've been
inundated with patients who are anxious
and don't understand why the advice is
trained so quickly announced on Saturday
night implemented on Monday morning so
why he's been rushed through before
patients and GPS who they're relying on
for advice could
understand it thank you well it hasn't
been rushed through far from it we've
we've worked for some time to make sure
that any changes that we make and these
are small cautious changes can benefit
people in a safe way and so as you say
we announced it at the weekend and I
think that being able to make changes
like this are is important for people
it's important for especially for those
who are shielded you know I I think it's
quite hard to imagine for those of us
even those of us who are practicing
self-isolation but have throughout been
able to go out for instance to exercise
to understand the impact of shielding of
being of having by the guidance to stay
in your own home so absolutely once we
made the decision you including and in
collaboration with all of the government
bodies we then communicated that
decision and if this was the right time
to be able to change that and to be able
to change that advice and the final
question from Fiona read at
Dumfriesshire newspapers thousand
readers need to travel from Scotland in
to England everyday for work business
educational reasons those people now
face mixed messages as lockdown uses on
both sides of the border in different
ways so is it time to synchronize the
easing of lockdown and have more uk-wide
messaging including just one test
interest system for the whole country
well we've worked very closely and very
hard to try to ensure that the changes
are made on a uk-wide basis after all we
face this virus as one country and I
think to the very large extent that is
what has happened there are some minor
differences but the major principles of
the changes and the lockdown rules are
the same I speak to my
a counterpart in the Scottish government
regularly and it is there is also intern
guidance for what people should do at
the border for instance those in England
should not drive to Scotland for
recreation so there's some specifics
around the border now legally of course
the powers to be able to implement the
lockdown are devolved and so I respect
the Scottish Government's right to take
slightly different well to take
different decisions should they want to
and they've made in some cases some
slightly different decisions and it is a
therefore you know it's a consequence of
devolution but the overall
responsibility for public health
emergencies is of course a uk-wide one
and we'll make sure that we do move as
closely as possible given the different
situations on the ground and the
different slightly different shape of
the pandemic in Scotland as well please
yes of course maybe professor Newton and
so the scientific advice obviously as
the secretary state said is different in
different parts of the UK and so today
shielded people in Scotland still cannot
go out and unlike in England so who is
right and the Scottish and English teams
working together scientific teams
working together or work and
independently yes yes so you're quite
right to point out of course that the
same evidence applies across the UK we
do work together we we have regular
discussions and people there is a cross
membership for the different the
different advisory teams that we we give
very similar advice and we do try
whatever possible to make their guidance
the same or at least to have the same
principles behind it so so every effort
is made by scientific advisers to
recognise what you say that the public
need clear advice and we need to make it
the same across the UK but as sector
state has pointed out the mechanisms for
implementing that advice are different
some of that is just the fact that we
have different arrangements so there are
different organizations in different
parts of the country so for example the
test and trace program is implemented
slightly differently in Scotland so
you've got slightly different bod
is taking different approach and
sometimes of course these are political
decisions and these and some of those
are devolved so we do everything we can
to to simplify and unify and over time
the differences tend to get ironed out
but I fully accept your point thanks
very much indeed so that concludes our
press briefing for today see you again
soon no doubt Matt Hancock they're the
health secretary and professor John
Newton without latest
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News